Finish cell typing text (#603)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: scRNA-seq-advanced/02-celltype_assignment.Rmd

While we have the ADT data, it is _not_ being used for this stage of the analysis.

> ```{r cluster cells}

Author: I'll make it live... little warmup
```suggestion
```{r cluster cells, live=TRUE}
```

However, what we did here was very ad-hoc and quite manual!
We didn't calculate any statistics, and we had to look at every tag we were interested in to pick thresholds.
A different dataset might have different background levels, which would require different thresholds. 

While this technique might be good for some simple experiments, and can be useful for manual curation, it might not translate well to more complex datasets with multiple samples.
We also looked at each marker separately, which might not be the most efficient or robust method of analysis.

For a more principled approach that allows identification of cell types by looking at the expression of sets of genes that are known to characterize each cell type, you might look at the [`AUCell` package](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/AUCell.html).
For more on that method, the OSCA section [Assigning cell labels from gene sets](http://bioconductor.org/books/3.16/OSCA.basic/cell-type-annotation.html#assigning-cell-labels-from-gene-sets) is a very good reference.

## Cell type annotation with `SingleR`

> An alternative approach to using known marker genes for classification is to instead classify cells by way of comparison to a reference dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An alternative approach to using known marker genes for classification is to instead classify cells by comparing to a reference expression dataset.
```

To do this, we will find a well-curated gene expression dataset that contains samples with known cell types.

> We can then train a model based on this dataset and look at each of the cells in our new dataset to determine which (if any) of the known cell types has the most similar expression pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can then train a model based on this reference dataset and then ask whether any cells in our dataset have similar expression patterns.
```

> The details of how such a model may be constructed and trained will vary by method, but this overall approach is widely applied. 

Reviewer: >will vary by method

We probably need to state explicitly that this method is more of the concept "cell annotation by reference" and not a specific method eg singler.

Reviewer: Ah! Well then something definitely needs to be clarified since I got a bit lost in antecedents the first time around. Reading it again, I feel like something as simple as "...will vary by specific method" or "will vary by implementation" does it?

Author: ```suggestion
The details of how such a model may be constructed and trained will vary by the specific method, but this overall approach is widely applied. 
```

> For this section, we will focus on the `SingleR` package and its methods, which are described in detail in  [_The SingleR Book_](https://bioconductor.org/books/3.16/SingleRBook/).

Reviewer: space 
```suggestion
For this section, we will focus on the `SingleR` package and its methods, which are described in detail in [_The SingleR Book_](https://bioconductor.org/books/3.16/SingleRBook/).
```

### Reference datasets

Selecting a reference dataset is one of the more critical steps for this enterprise.

> At the most basic level, if the reference dataset does not include the types of cells that we expect to see in our sample, it won't be useful.

Reviewer: I don't think this is needed

```suggestion
If the reference dataset does not include the types of cells that we expect to see in our sample, it won't be useful.
```

> So we will want a dataset that has as many as possible of the cell types that we expect to see, at a level of specificity that aligns with our goals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So we will want a reference dataset that has as many as possible of the cell types that we expect to are in our dataset, at a level of specificity that aligns with our goals.
```

specificity feels a little too stats-y for the concept? "granularity" maybe?

> For `SingleR` that reference data can be from bulk RNA sequencing or from other single-cell experiments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`SingleR` analysis commonly uses bulk RNA sequencing or other single-cell experiments as references.
```

```{r get monaco}
# Bioconductor "Hub" packages provide the option to cache
# downloads, but the interactive prompt can be annoying
# when working with notebooks.
# These options disable the prompt by giving permission 
# to create the cache automatically
ExperimentHub::setExperimentHubOption("ASK", FALSE)
AnnotationHub::setAnnotationHubOption("ASK", FALSE)

# Get Monaco 2019 data from celldex with Ensembl ids.
monaco_ref <- celldex::MonacoImmuneData(ensembl = TRUE)
```
What is this `monaco_ref` object?

```{r explore ref, live = TRUE}
monaco_ref
```

A `SummarizedExperiment` is very similar to a `SingleCellExperiment`, except rather than having one column per cell, each column is a *sample*.
Otherwise, the components are very similar: each row is still a gene, for example, and additional data about the samples are stored in the `colData`.
In fact, the `SingleCellExperiment` object is derived from a `SummarizedExperiment`, with some extra slots that are more relevant to single-cell data.

What information do we have for the samples?

> ```{r explore reference sample data}

Reviewer: live?

Author: ```suggestion
```{r explore reference sample data, live=TRUE}
```

colData(monaco_ref)
```

There are three main columns for the sample data:

- `label.main` is a more general cell type assignment.  

- `label.fine` is a fine-level cell type with more specific labels.
The exact level of granularity of these `main` and `fine` designations (and indeed the label names themselves) will vary among datasets, so it is important to look at the reference to see whether it is suitable for your application.

- `label.ont` is a standardized [Cell Ontology](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/cl) identifier. 
Using the cell ontology can allow for more complex representations of the relationships among different cell types, but investigating that is beyond the scope of this workshop. 

Another component we would like to explore is how many of each of these cell types we have in the dataset. 
A bit of quick `dplyr` wrangling can give us the answer.

> ```{r count cell types}

Reviewer: I think this could be live too, but no strong feelings.

colData(monaco_ref) |> 
  as.data.frame() |>
  dplyr::count(label.main, label.fine)
```

This is pretty good! 

> Most cell types have 4 replicates, which is more replicates than we often find.

Reviewer: Not sure about the word "replicate." 
"occurrence"? Or just something like, "we see most cell types at least 4x, which is good"

Author: Why not? These are biological replicates!

### What does `SingleR` do?

As mentioned earlier, `SingleR` builds a model from a set of training data, and then uses that model to classify cells (or groups of cells) in new datasets.

> `SingleR` works by first identifying a set of marker genes that can be used to differentiate among the cell types in the reference dataset. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build this model, `SingleR` first identifies a set of marker genes that can be used to differentiate among the cell types in the reference dataset. 
```

> It does this by performing pairwise comparisons among all of the cell types, and retaining the top set of genes differentiating each pair.

Reviewer: > performing pairwise comparisons

I think if you want to get into this you'll need a just a smidge more detail. What are the comparison tests and what is a "top" result?

The idea is that this set of genes will be the most informative for differentiating cell types.

Then, for each cell, `SingleR` calculates the Spearman correlation between expression of that cell and each cell type (using the only the genes chosen earlier).
Notably, this is a non-parametric correlation, so the scaling and normalization that we apply (or don't) should not matter!

> (But if you have full-length transcripts from another technology, you will probably want to convert to Transcripts per Million (TPM).)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[But if you have full-length transcripts from another technology, you will probably want to convert to Transcripts per Million (TPM).]
```

Author: Is this because there are nested parentheses? If it really bothers you, I would go the other way, with square internal parens. But I'll just unnest:
```suggestion
Note that if you used a single-cell technology that produces full-length transcripts (i.e., SMART-seq), you will probably want to convert your counts to Transcripts per Million (TPM), to allow more consistent ranking among transcripts of different lengths. 
```

The reference cell type with the highest correlation is then chosen as the cell type assignment for that cell.
If there are multiple cell types with high scores, an optional fine-tuning step repeats the process using only the most relevant genes for those cell types.

### Running `SingleR`

For our first run, we will do the marker gene selection (training) and classification in a single step, using the convenience function `SingleR::SingleR()`.

> For this we need only supply three main arguments: Our SCE object, a reference matrix (here in `SummarizedExperiment` format), and the labels for each of the samples in the reference that we want to use.

Reviewer: We might want to re-iterate here that's IDs do need to match, and they may recall we asked for Ensembl earlier so it would match our data.

Author: ```suggestion
For this we need only supply three main arguments: Our SCE object, a reference matrix (here in `SummarizedExperiment` format), and the labels for each of the samples in the reference that we want to use.
We also need to be sure that our sample and the reference data use the same gene IDs, which is why we requested the Ensembl IDs when getting the reference dataset.
```

Because this function is doing many repetitive calculations (lots of correlations!), we can speed it up by including the `BPPARAM` argument.
This is a common argument in `Bioconductor` packages where `BP` stands for the `BiocParallel` package, which provides multiprocessing capabilities to many Bioconductor functions. 
In this case, we will use the argument `BiocParallel::MulticoreParam(4)` to specify we want to use local multicore processing with 4 "workers".

```{r simple SingleR, live=TRUE}
# calculate SingleR results in one step
singler_result <- SingleR::SingleR(
  sce, # our query SCE
  ref = monaco_ref, # reference dataset
  labels = monaco_ref$label.main, # reference labels to use
  BPPARAM = BiocParallel::MulticoreParam(4) # multiprocessing
)
```

`SingleR` provides a few nice visualizations for evaluating the statistics it calculated and the assignments it makes.
One is a heatmap of the scores for each cell, arranged by the cell type that was assigned to each.
This is created with the `SingleR::plotScoreHeatmap()` function.

```{r plot SingleR heatmap, live = TRUE}
SingleR::plotScoreHeatmap(singler_result)
```

> We can also  pull out individual components of the results object for plotting in the context of our input SCE object.

Reviewer: space
```suggestion
We can also pull out individual components of the results object for plotting in the context of our input SCE object.
```

Here we will save the pruned labels (where low-quality assignments have been given an `NA` label), storing them back in our SCE object (specifically to a new column of the `colData` table).

```{r save celltypes, live=TRUE}
sce$celltype_main <- singler_result$pruned.labels
```

Now we can plot the cell type assignments onto our UMAP to see how they compare to the patterns we saw there before.

```{r plot celltype umap, live=TRUE}
scater::plotUMAP(sce, colour_by = "celltype_main") 
```

> Annoyingly, the `NA` and `T cells` labels are quite close in color, and the `scater` and `SingleR` packages don't agree on color choices, but this isn't a bad start!

Reviewer: 😂 
```suggestion
Annoyingly, the `NA` and `T cells` labels are quite close in color, and the `scater` and `SingleR` packages don't agree on color choices, but this plot isn't a bad start!
```

> We seem to have a pretty good set of assignments, with most of the cell type assignments falling into groupings consistent with what we see in the UMAP plot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We seem to have a pretty good set of cell type assignments, with most falling into groupings consistent with what we see in the UMAP plot.
```

We can thank the fact that this is a PBMC sample and that we have a good reference dataset for these cell types for the cleanliness of this plot.
Quite often with other kinds of samples (especially cancer cells!) things will be much less clean!

> We can also look to see how the cell type assignments are distributed using the base R function `table()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also look to see how the cell type assignments are distributed using the base R function `table()`.
```

```{r cell type table}
table(singler_result$pruned.labels, useNA = "ifany")
```

### Exploring finer labels

In the previous cell typing, we used the `label.main` column, but we also had `label.fine`, so let's use that to explore the dataset in a bit more detail. 

We will also take this time to dive a bit deeper into the steps that `SingleR` performed. 
As mentioned, the first step is training the model, during which we identify the genes that will be used for the correlation analysis later.
While this step is not particularly slow, if we were classifying multiple samples, we would not want to have to repeat it for every sample.

To do the training, we will use the `trainSingleR()` function. 
For this we will start with our reference and the labels we want to train the model with.

We can then specify the method used to select the genes that will be used for classification.
The default method is `"de"`, which performs a differential expression analysis for each pair of labels, but we could also use `"sd"` to select the genes which are most variable across labels, or `"all"` to use all genes.

> If we want to get really fancy, we could even provide a specific list of genes to use.

Reviewer: Might link a singler book section here?

We should note here that the reference dataset for `SingleR` does not need to be from a compendium like `celldex`!
If you have any well-classified dataset that you want to use as a reference, you can, as long as you can create a gene by sample expression matrix and a vector of cell types for each sample. 
You will want to ensure that the cell types you expect to see in your sample are present in the reference dataset, and data should be normalized, but otherwise the method can be quite flexible. 
You can even use a previously-annotated SingleCellExperiment as a reference for a new dataset.

> For more details about custom references, see  the [OSCA chapter on cell type annotation](http://bioconductor.org/books/3.13/OSCA.basic/cell-type-annotation.html#using-custom-references)

Reviewer: space
```suggestion
For more details about custom references, see the [OSCA chapter on cell type annotation](http://bioconductor.org/books/3.13/OSCA.basic/cell-type-annotation.html#using-custom-references)
```

We do want to be sure that the genes selected for the model will be among those present in our SCE object, so we will use the `restrict` argument with a vector of the genes in our SCE.
This step would happen automatically with the `SingleR::SingleR()` function, but we need to add it manually for this use case.

```{r train finemodel, live=TRUE}
# build fine model
singler_finemodel <- SingleR::trainSingleR(
  monaco_ref, # reference dataset
  labels = monaco_ref$label.fine, # labels for training dataset
  # use DE to select genes (default)
  genes = "de", 
  # only use genes in the sce object
  restrict = rownames(sce),
  # parallel processing
  BPPARAM = BiocParallel::MulticoreParam(4)
)
```

Now we can perform the classification step, using our SCE object and the `SingleR` model that we just created.

```{r classify fine, live=TRUE}
# classify with fine model
singler_result_fine <- SingleR::classifySingleR(
  # our SCE object
  sce,
  # the trained model object
  singler_finemodel,
  # perform fine tuning (default)

>   fine.tune = TRUE,

Reviewer: is this being written just to be explicit? fine!

    "Natural killer cells",
    "B cells",
    "Monocytes",
    "Dendritic cells",
    "Progenitor cells",
    "Low-density basophils"
  )
```

Now that we have that set up, we can plot using our collapsed and ordered cell type labels.

```{r plot collapsed, live=TRUE}
sce$celltype_collapsed <- collapsed_labels
scater::plotUMAP(sce, 
                 colour_by = "celltype_collapsed")
```

### Heatmap of cell types & clusters

Let's look at how the cell type assignments we obtained using `SingleR` compare to the clusters that we found using the unsupervised clustering at the start of this notebook.

To do this, we will again use the `table()` function, but now with two vectors as input, to build a contingency table of the cell types and clusters that each cell was classified with. 

```{r type cluster table}
# create a table of clusters & cell type counts
type_cluster_tab <- table(sce$celltype_fine, sce$nn_cluster, useNA = "ifany")

# look at the top corner of the results
type_cluster_tab[1:5, 1:5]
```

As you can see, this produced a table with rows for each cell type and columns for each cluster number.
The values are the count of cells for each cluster/cell type combination.

> These raw counts of cells are not quite what we are going to want for visualization. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, these raw counts are not quite what we'll want for visualization. 
```

> Since the total number of cells in each cluster will vary, we'd like to convert these counts into the proportions of each cell type in each cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the total number of cells differs across clusters, we'd like to convert these counts into the _proportions_ of each cell type in each cluster.
```

We'll do this by going through the table column by column and dividing each value by the sum for that cluster.
To do that, we will use the `apply` function, which allows us to operate on a matrix row by row or column by column, applying a function to each "slice".

> Since the function we want to apply is very short, we will use R's new anonymous function shorthand: 

Reviewer: "new anonymous function shorthand" some kind of release link could be good? Mostly I mean, what is "NEW" in this case?

Author: How about just this:

```suggestion
Since the function we want to apply is very short, we will use R's new (as of  version 4.1) anonymous function shorthand: 
```

```{r cluster heatmap, live=TRUE}
# plot with pheatmap
pheatmap::pheatmap(type_cluster_tab)
```

We can see that most of our clusters are indeed defined by a single cell type, though there are some clusters (e.g., 1 & 9) that have a number of (related) cell types within them.
There are also some places where single cell types are spread across a few different clusters (Classical monocytes, for example).

### Classifying by clusters

While most of the time we will want to classify single cells, sometimes the sparseness of the data may mean that individual cells do not provide reliable estimates of cell types. 

An alternative approach is to classify the clusters as a whole, assuming that the clusters we have identified represent a single cell state.
If that is the case, then we should be able to combine the data for all cells across each cluster, then apply our cell typing method to this group of cells. 
This is similar to an approach we will return to later in the context of differential expression. 

The first step here is to create a new matrix where we sum the counts across cells that are from the same type according to our clustering.

> Because `SingleR` is a non-parametric approach, we will perform this step with the raw counts matrix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because `SingleR` is a non-parametric approach, we can perform this step with the raw counts matrix.
```

There are a few different ways to do this, but we will use the function `DelayedArray::colsum()`, which can work directly on the sparse matrices that are often found in SCE objects.
We will provide it with the matrix we need, and then a vector of the cluster assignments for each column of the matrix.
The function will then sum expression values for each gene across all of the columns that have that value.

```{r sum clusters}
# sum count matrix by cluster
cluster_mat <- DelayedArray::colsum(counts(sce), sce$nn_cluster)
# print new dimensions
dim(cluster_mat)
```

> You can see that the resulting matrix still has the same number of rows we have seen before, but now only has rows for the number of clusters that were assigned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see that the resulting matrix still has the same number of columns we have seen before, but now only has rows for the number of clusters that were assigned.
```

```{r singler cluster, live=TRUE}
# run SingleR classification with previously trained model
singler_cluster <- SingleR::classifySingleR(
  cluster_mat, # cluster expression matrix
  singler_finemodel # pre-trained model
)

# view results
head(singler_cluster)
```

The result is a fairly small table of results, but we are most interested in the labels, which we would like to associate with each cell in our SCE object for visualization.
Since the cluster labels are the row names of that table, we can perform a cute little trick to assign labels back to each cell based on the name of the cluster that it was assigned to. 
(In this case the cluster names are all numbers, but that might not always be the case.)
We'll select values repeatedly from the `singler_cluster` table, using the cluster assignment to pick a row, and then always picking the `pruned.labels` column.

```{r assign cell labels}
sce$celltype_cluster <- singler_cluster[sce$nn_cluster, "pruned.labels"]
```

Now we can plot these cluster-based cell type assignments using the now familiar `plotUMAP()` function

```{r plot cluster celltypes, live=TRUE}
scater::plotUMAP(sce, colour_by = "celltype_cluster")
```

> This sure looks nice, but what have we really done here? 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This sure looks nice and clean, but what have we really done here? 
```

i like the clean word here, is mostly my point.

We are _assuming_ that each cluster has only a single cell type, which is a pretty bold assumption, as we really aren't sure that the clusters we created were correct.
You may recall that clustering algorithms are quite sensitive to parameter choice, so a different parameter choice could quite likely give a different result.

> ### MetaCell approaches

Reviewer: I think this is good content, but just want to note we _could_ end up hitting fatigue/time limits for this section. That said the chunks are not live (good!), so this may end up serving as a useful reference for them. Will be interesting to see how it all goes!

> As an intermediate step between the potentially messy single-cell cell type assignment and the almost certainly overconfident cluster-based assignment above, we can take an approach inspired by a paper by [Baran _et al._ (2019)](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-019-1812-2) that they called _metacells_. 
> The idea is that we can perform fine-scaled clustering to identify groups of very similar cells, then sum the counts within those clusters for further analysis. 

Reviewer: Wording is a little confusing here, reads like the paper is called _metacells_.
Open for back and forth here.

```suggestion
As a middle-ground between the potentially messy single-cell cell type assignment and the almost-certainly overconfident cluster-based assignment above, we can take approach inspired by [Baran _et al._ (2019)](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-019-1812-2) using something called _metacells_. 
The idea is that we can perform fine-scaled clustering to identify groups ("metacells") of very similar cells, then sum the counts within those clusters for further analysis. 
```

> The original paper includes a number of optimizations to make sure that the metacell clusters have desired properties for downstream analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The original paper includes a number of optimizations to make sure that the metacell clusters have desirable properties for downstream analysis.
```

```{r kmeans cluster}
# perform k-means clustering
kclusters <- bluster::clusterRows(
  reducedDim(sce, "PCA"), 
  bluster::KmeansParam(
    centers = 100, # the number of clusters 
    iter.max = 100 # more iterations to be sure of convergence
  )
)
```

Now we can apply exactly the same approach we did when we had the 20 clusters we had identified with the earlier graph-based clustering.

```{r metacell singler}
# create a "metacell" matrix by summing fine-scale clusters
metacell_mat <- DelayedArray::colsum(counts(sce), kclusters)

# apply SingleR model to metacell matrix
metacell_singler <- SingleR::classifySingleR(
  metacell_mat, 
  singler_finemodel
)

# apply metacell cell type assignments to individual cells
sce$celltype_metacell <- metacell_singler[kclusters, "pruned.labels"]
```

Now we can plot the results as we have done before.

```{r metacell umap}
scater::plotUMAP(sce, colour_by = "celltype_metacell")
```

What do you think of this plot? 
Is this more or less useful than the original cell-based clustering?

> ### Save results

Reviewer: level 2 here
```suggestion
## Save results
```

To save disk space (and time), we won't write out the whole SCE object, as we haven't changed any of the core data there. 
Instead we will just write out the cell information table (`colData`) as a TSV file.

> ```{r save sce}

Reviewer: live?

Author: Needs a renaming too: 
````suggestion
```{r save cell info | live=TRUE}
````

  bluster::KmeansParam(
    centers = 100, # the number of clusters 
    iter.max = 100 # more iterations to be sure of convergence
  )
)
```

Now we can apply exactly the same approach we did when we had the 20 clusters we had identified with the earlier graph-based clustering.

```{r metacell singler}
# create a "metacell" matrix by summing fine-scale clusters
metacell_mat <- DelayedArray::colsum(counts(sce), kclusters)

# apply SingleR model to metacell matrix
metacell_singler <- SingleR::classifySingleR(
  metacell_mat, 
  singler_finemodel
)

# apply metacell cell type assignments to individual cells
sce$celltype_metacell <- metacell_singler[kclusters, "pruned.labels"]
```

Now we can plot the results as we have done before.

```{r metacell umap}
scater::plotUMAP(sce, colour_by = "celltype_metacell")
```

What do you think of this plot? 
Is this more or less useful than the original cell-based clustering?

## Save results

To save disk space (and time), we won't write out the whole SCE object, as we haven't changed any of the core data there. 
Instead we will just write out the cell information table (`colData`) as a TSV file.

```{r save cell info, live=TRUE}

> readr::write_tsv(as.data.frame(colData(sce)), file = cellinfo_file)

Author: Pipes for unnesting.
```suggestion
colData(sce) |>
  as.data.frame() |>
  readr::write_tsv(file = cellinfo_file)
```

In fact, the `SingleCellExperiment` object is derived from a `SummarizedExperiment`, with some extra slots that are more relevant to single-cell data.

What information do we have for the samples?

```{r explore}
colData(monaco_ref)
```

There are three main columns for the sample data:

- `label.main` is a more general cell type assignment.  

- `label.fine` is a fine-level cell type with more specific labels.
The exact level of granularity of these `main` and `fine` designations will vary among data sets, so it is important to look at the reference to see whether it is suitable for your application.

- `label.ont` is a standardized [Cell Ontology](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/cl) identifier. 
Using the cell ontology can allow for more complex representations of the relationships among different cell types, but investigating that is beyond the scope of this workshop. 

Another component we would like to explore is how many of each of these cell types we have in the data set. 
A bit of quick `dplyr` wrangling can give us the answer.

> ```{r}

Reviewer: chunk label

colData(monaco_ref) |> 
  as.data.frame() |>
  dplyr::count(label.main, label.fine)
```

This is pretty good! 
Most cell types have 4 replicates, which is more replicates than we often find.

### What does `SingleR` do?

As mentioned earlier, `SingleR` builds a model from a set of training data, and then uses that model to classify cells (or groups of cells) in new data sets.

`SingleR` works by first identifying a set of marker genes that can be used to differentiate among the cell types in the reference data set. 
It does this by performing pairwise comparisons among all of the cell types, and retaining the top set of genes differentiating each pair.
The idea is that this set of genes will be the most informative for differentiating cell types.

> Then, for each cell, `SingleR` then calculates the Spearman correlation between expression that cell and each cell type (using the only the genes chosen earlier).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, for each cell, `SingleR` calculates the Spearman correlation between expression of that cell and each cell type (using the only the genes chosen earlier).
```

Notably, this is a non-parametric correlation, so the scaling and normalization that we apply (or don't) should not matter!

> (But if you have full-length transcripts from another technology though, you will probably want to convert to Transcripts per Million (TPM).)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(But if you have full-length transcripts from another technology, you will probably want to convert to Transcripts per Million (TPM).)
```

The reference cell type with the highest correlation is then chosen as the cell type assignment for that cell.
If there are multiple cell types with high scores, an optional fine-tuning step repeats the process using only the most relevant genes for those cell types.

### Running `SingleR`

For our first run, we will do the marker gene selection (training) and classification in a single step, using the convenience function `SingleR::SingleR()`.

> For this we need only supply three main arguments: Our `sce` object, a reference matrix (here in `SummarizedExperiment` format), and the labels for each of the samples in the reference that we want to use.

Reviewer: I think we generally have been saying SCE (caps, not `code`), yes?

We will also take this time to dive a bit deeper into the steps that `SingleR` performed. 
As mentioned, the first step is training the model, during which we identify the genes that will be used for the correlation analysis later.
While this step is not particularly slow, if we were classifying multiple samples, we would not want to have to repeat it for every sample.

To do the training, we will use the `trainSingleR()` function. 
For this we will start with our reference and the labels we want to train the model with.

We can then specify the method used to select the genes that will be used for classification.
The default method is `"de"`, which performs a differential expression analysis for each pair of labels, but we could also use `"sd"` to select the genes which are most variable across labels, or `"all"` to use all genes.
If we want to get really fancy, we could even provide a specific list of genes to use.

We should note here that the reference dataset for `SingleR` does not need to be from a compendium like `celldex`!

> If you have any well-classified data set that you want to use as a reference, you can, as long as you can create a gene by sample expression matrix and a vector of cell types for each sample. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have any well-classified dataset that you want to use as a reference, you can, as long as you can create a gene by sample expression matrix and a vector of cell types for each sample. 
```

> You will want to ensure that the cell types you expect to see are present in the reference data set, and data should be normalized, but otherwise the method can be quite flexible. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will want to ensure that the cell types you expect to see in your sample are present in the reference dataset, and data should be normalized, but otherwise the method can be quite flexible. 
```
I'm changing to `dataset` throughout because in the beginning that's what you were using. Either one is fine, but I think we just want to be consistent.

collapsed_labels <- singler_result_fine$pruned.labels |>
  forcats::fct_collapse(
    "Monocytes" = c(
        "Classical monocytes", 
        "Intermediate monocytes", 	
        "Non classical monocytes"),
    "Dendritic cells" = c(
        "Myeloid dendritic cells",
        "Plasmacytoid dendritic cells"),
    "T cells" = c(
        "MAIT cells",
        "Non-Vd2 gd T cells",
        "Vd2 gd T cells"),
    "Helper T cells" = c(
        "Th1 cells",
        "Th1/Th17 cells", 
        "Th17 cells", 
        "Th2 cells",
        "Follicular helper T cells"),
    "B cells" = c(
        "Naive B cells",
        "Switched memory B cells",
        "Non-switched memory B cells",
        "Exhausted B cells",
        "Plasmablasts"		
    )
  ) |>
  # order for plotting
  forcats::fct_relevel(
    "Helper T cells",
    "T regulatory cells",
    "Naive CD4 T cells",
    "Terminal effector CD4 T cells",
    "Naive CD8 T cells",
    "Central memory CD8 T cells",
    "Effector memory CD8 T cells",
    "Terminal effector CD8 T cells",
    "T cells",
    "Natural killer cells",
    "B cells",
    "Monocytes",
    "Dendritic cells",
    "Progenitor cells",
    "Low-density basophils"
  )
```

> Now that we have that set up, we can now plot using our collapsed and ordered cell type labels.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we have that set up, we can plot using our collapsed and ordered cell type labels.
```

> ```{r}

Reviewer 2: chunk label

sce$celltype_collapsed <- collapsed_labels
scater::plotUMAP(sce, 
                 colour_by = "celltype_collapsed")
```

### Heatmap of cell types & clusters

> Let's look at how the cell type assignments we have compare to the clusters that we found using the unsupervised clustering at the start of this notebook.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's look at how the cell type assignments we obtained using `SingleR` compare to the clusters that we found using the unsupervised clustering at the start of this notebook.
```

To do this, we will again use the `table()` function, but now with two vectors as input, to build a contingency table of the cell types and clusters that each cell was classified with. 

> ```{r}

Reviewer 2: chunk label

> pheatmap::pheatmap(type_cluster_tab)

Reviewer 2: chunk label

Because `SingleR` is a non-parametric approach, we will perform this step with the raw counts matrix.
There are a few different ways to do this, but we will use the function `DelayedArray::colsum()`, which can work directly on the sparse matrices that are often found in SCE objects.
We will provide it with the matrix we need, and then a vector of the cluster assignments for each column of the matrix.
The function will then sum expression values for each gene across all of the columns that have that value.

```{r sum clusters}
# sum count matrix by cluster
cluster_mat <- DelayedArray::colsum(counts(sce), sce$nn_cluster)
# print new dimensions
dim(cluster_mat)
```

You can see that the resulting matrix still has the same number of rows we have seen before, but now only has rows for the number of clusters that were assigned.

Now we can apply the same `SingleR` model to these results, using the new matrix as input along with the previously trained model.
As there are only 20 clusters to classify, this will be very quick, and we don't need to parallelize it!

```{r singler cluster, live = TRUE}

> singler_cluster <- SingleR::classifySingleR(

Reviewer 2: I think I would add in some comments here about each of the arguments.

  cluster_mat, 
  singler_finemodel
)

# view results
head(singler_cluster)
```

> The result is a fairly small table of results, but we are interested most in the labels, which we would like to assign back to our SCE object cell by cell for visualization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The result is a fairly small table of results, but we are most interested in the labels, which we would like to associate with each cell in our SCE object for visualization.
```

Since the cluster labels are the row names of that table, we can perform a cute little trick to assign labels back to each cell based on the name of the cluster that it was assigned to. 
(In this case the cluster names are all numbers, but that might not always be the case.)
We'll select values repeatedly from the `singler_cluster` table, using the cluster assignment to pick a row, and then always picking the `pruned.labels` column.

```{r assign cell labels}
sce$celltype_cluster <- singler_cluster[sce$nn_cluster, "pruned.labels"]
```

Now we can plot these cluster-based cell type assignments using the now familiar `plotUMAP()` function

> ```{r}

Reviewer 2: chunk label

scater::plotUMAP(sce, colour_by = "celltype_cluster")
```

This sure looks nice, but what have we really done here? 
We are _assuming_ that each cluster has only a single cell type, which is a pretty bold assumption, as we really aren't sure that the clusters we created were correct.
You may recall that clustering algorithms are quite sensitive to parameter choice, so a different parameter choice could quite likely give a different result.

### MetaCell approaches

As an intermediate step between the potentially messy single-cell cell type assignment and the almost certainly overconfident cluster-based assignment above, we can take an approach inspired by a paper by [Baran _et al._ (2019)](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-019-1812-2) that they called _metacells_. 

> The idea is that we can perform fine-scaled clustering to identify groups of similar very similar cells, then sum the counts within those clusters  for further analysis. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The idea is that we can perform fine-scaled clustering to identify groups of similar cells, then sum the counts within those clusters for further analysis. 
```

The original paper includes a number of optimizations to make sure that the metacell clusters have desired properties for downstream analysis.
We won't go into that depth here, but we can apply similar ideas.

To begin, we will perform some fine-scale clustering, using a simpler clustering algorithm: K-means clustering.
We will use the same `bluster` package, clustering based on the PCA results we have from earlier, but this algorithm allows us to specify the number of clusters we want to end up with.

> We have  about 8000 cells, so let's cluster those into groups of approximately 80 cells, which works out to 100 clusters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have about 8000 cells, so let's cluster those into groups of approximately 80 cells, which works out to 100 clusters.
```
